---
layout: post
title: Why blog?
tags: blogging
#As I have it set up right now, tags don't seem to do anything...
#meta: Why not?
---

As a first post, I think I should attempt to explain why I am blogging, and what I hope to gain out of it.

I have decided to create a blog as a result of Matt Might's blog [post](http://matt.might.net/articles/how-to-blog-as-an-academic/) about blogging as an academic. What I took away from his post was that blogging has personal benefits. If there are things I wish to remember, I should blog about them. If there are things I am having difficulty understanding, I should write about them so that I become more familiar, and increase my understanding.

Really, my reasons for blogging at the moment have less to do with other people reading what I have to say, and more to do with me saying it.

I hope to better polish my writing skills and to use this as motivation to finish the myriad of projects floating around my desk. Above all else though, I hope to use this as a learning opportunity.

#### Why not Blog?
----

Julie Neidlinger gave a few reasons why you *shouldn't* blog [here.](http://todaymade.com/blog/should-not-blog/) Condensed, she says you shouldn't blog if:

* You don't know what a blog is.
* You take negative feedback poorly.
* You don't know who your audience is.
   - Know who they are in general.
   - Know who they are in specific.
* You don't really intend to do anything with it.
   - Treat it seriously, care about it, and don't let it go stagnant.

#### What can I Take Away?
----

Of Julie's reasons, it's the last two that give me pause. I know who *I* am, and what *my* interests are, but who's my audience? When I decided to attempt to get GitHub Pages up and running, I gave no consideration to my audience, and as you read above, I've been more concerned with the writing than the reading.

Additionally, I'm not sure if I will continue this past just a few posts. Motivation is something I struggle with, and for something who's benefits might not be as tangible as I'd like, I'm not sure how this will work. I live a pretty boring life; there's not much to say about me, and I'm not sure that anything I have to say will be worth reading. The only way to know for sure though, is to try.
