---
layout: post
title: Printf Cheatsheet
---

This information is almost exclusively taken from `printf`'s man pages. I wanted a quick reference so I don't have to dig through the man pages again and again.

I will only cover `printf`, `fprintf`, `dprintf`, `sprintf`, and `snprintf`. See `printf(3)` for more information.

Here are the relevant function prototypes:

{% highlight c %}
#include <stdio.h>

int printf(const char *format, ...);
int fprintf(FILE *stream, const char *format, ...);
int dprintf(int fd, const char *format, ...);
int sprintf(char *str, const char *format, ...);
int snprintf(char *str, size_t size, const char *format, ...);
{% endhighlight %}

`printf` writes to `stdout`, `fprintf` writes to the given output stream. `dprintf` is similar, but prints to a file descriptor `fd` rather than a `stdio` stream. `sprintf` and `snprintf` both write to the character stream `str`, but `snprintf` will write *at most* `size` bytes, including the null terminator `\0`. All of these functions make use of a `format` string that specifies how subsequent arguments are to be converted for output. The functions return the number of bytes written, excluding the null terminator.

Format strings are character strings. The format string is composed of zero or more directives: ordinary characters, and conversion specifications. The ordinary characters (not `%`) are copied unchanged to the output stream, and the conversion specifications result in the fetching of subsequent arguments. Each conversion specification is prefixed with the `%` characters, and is postfixed with a conversion specifier. There may be zero or more optional flags in between in this order: minimum field width, precision, and length modifier. e. g. `"%[flag][width][precision][length]<conversion specifier>"`

### Flag characters
 The `%` character is followed by zero or more of the following

 * `#` For `%o` conversions, `0` is prepended to the output string if the first character is not already `0`. For `%x` and `%X` conversions, `0x` or `0X` is prepended to the output string. For `%a`, `%A`, `%e`, `%E`, `%f`, `%F`, `%g`, and `%G` conversions, the result will always contain a decimal point. For `%g` and `%G` conversions, trailing zeros will not be removed. For other conversions, the result is undefined.
 * `0` The value should be zero padded.
 * `-` The value should be left justified, padded on the right with blanks. Overrides `0`.
 * `' '` (a `space`). A blank should be left before positive numbers produced by a signed conversion.
 * `+` A sign should be used for all numbers, not just negative. Overrides `space`.

### Field width
A decimal digit string specifying a minimum field width. If the converted value has fewer characters than the field width, it will be padded with spaces on the left (or right if `-` is used). Instead of a decimal digit string, one can use `*` or `*m$` for some decimal integer `m` to specify that the field width is given in the next argument or in the `m`-th argument.

### Precision
Precision is specified by a `.` followed by an optional decimal digit string. As with the field width, you can use `*` or `*m$`. if just `.` is given, the precision is assumed to be zero. For non-floating point numbers, the precision gives the minimum number of digits to appear. For floating-point numbers, the precision gives the number of digits to appear after the decimal point. For character strings (`%s`), the precision gives the maximum number of characters to print.

### Length modifier
Here, I take "integer conversion" to mean a `%d`, `%i`, `%o`, `%u`, `%x`, or `%X` conversion.

* `hh` The following integer conversion corresponds to a `signed` or `unsigned char`. Also, a following `%n` conversion corresponds to a pointer to a `signed char`.
* `h` The following integer conversion corresponds to a `short int` or `unsigned short int`. Also, a following `%n` conversion corresponds to a pointer to a `short int`.
* `l` The following integer conversion corresponds to a `long int` or `unsigned long int`. A following `%n` conversion corresponds to a pointer to a `long int`. A following `%c` conversion corresponds to a `wint_t`, and a following `%s` conversion corresponds to a `wchar_t`.
* `ll` The following integer conversion corresponds to a `long long int` or `unsigned long long int`. A following `%n` conversion corresponds to a pointer to a `long long int`.
* `L` The following `%a`, `%A`, `%e`, `%E`, `%f`, `%F`, `%g`, or `%G` conversion corresponds to a `long double` argument. Synonymous to `ll`.
* `j` The following integer conversion corresponds to a `intmax_t` or `uintmax_t`, or a following `%n` conversion corresponds to a pointer to an `intmax_t`.
* `z` The following integer conversion corresponds to a `size_t` or `ssize_t`, and a following `%n` conversion corresponds to a pointer to a `size_t`.
* `t` The following integer conversion corresponds to a `ptrdiff_t`, and a following `%n` conversion corresponds to a pointer to a `ptrdiff_t`.

### Conversion specifiers
* `%d` or `%i` A `signed int`
* `%u` An `unsigned int`
* `%o` The `unsigned int` argument is converted to unsigned octal
* `%x` The `unsigned int` argument is converted to unsigned hexadecimal using lowercase `abcdef`
* `%X` Same as above with capital `ABCDEF`
* `%e` Double scientific notation `[-]d.ddde[+,-]dd`. If no precision is specified, it is assumed to be `6`
* `%E` Same as above with a capital `E` to introduce the exponent
* `%f` Double of the form `[-]ddd.ddd`. If no precision is given, it is assumed to be `6`. `[-]inf` or `[-]infinity` will be used to represent infinity, and `nan` for NaN
* `%F` Same as above with `[-]INF` or `[-]INFINITY]` and `NAN`
* `%g` Same as either `%e` or `%f` depending on the value of the exponent. `%e` is used if the exponent is less than `-4` or greater than or equal to the precision
* `%G` Same as above with `%E` or `%F`
* `%a` Double is converted to hexadecimal using lowercase `abcdef`, `x`, and `p` in the style `[-]0xh.hhhhp[+,-]`
* `%A` Same as above with capital `ABCDEF`, `X`, and `P`
* `%c` If no `l` modifier is present, converts `int` to `unsigned char` and the resulting character is written. If an `l` modifier *is* present, `wint_t` (wide char) is converted to a multibyte sequence
* `%s` If no `l` modifier is present the `const char *` argument is expected to be a pointer to a character array. Characters are written up to the null terminator. If an `l` modifier *is* present, the `const wchar_t *` argument is expected to be a pointer to an array of wide characters.
* `%p` A pointer argument is printed in hexadecimal (as if by `%#x` or `%#lx`)
* `%n` The number of characters written so far is stored into the integer pointed to by the corresponding argument. That argument shall be an `int *`. No argument is converted. Behavior is undefined if the conversion specification includes any of the optional flags
* `%m` Prints the output of `strerror( errorno )`. Does not take an argument.
* `%%` Prints a literal `%`

### Special characters
* `\"` A literal double quote
* `\\` A literal backslash
* `\a` Alert, or Bell
* `\b` Backspace
* `\c` Produce no further output
* `\e` Escape
* `\f` Form feed
* `\n` New line
* `\r` Carriage return
* `\t` Horizontal tab
* `\v` Vertical tab
* `\NNN` byte with octal value NNN (1 to 3 digits)
* `\xHH` byte with hexadecimal value HH (1 to 2 digits)
* `\uHHHH` Unicode character with hex value HHHH (4 digits)
* `\UHHHHHHHH` Unicode character with hex value HHHHHHHH (8 digits)
* `%%` A literal `%`
